The following tools are not production-ready. They are included only as
conveniences, examples or rudimetary starting points for other development
efforts.

binlog and binreplay are probably only useful for people developing
drivers for new protocols, when gpsfake does not yet know what to do
with a log file. These utilities are not particularly clever - they
merely slurp a tty's output into a file, or spray the contents of a
file out of a tty.

ashctl might be used to reset an uncooperative Ashtech receiver to
a usable state. For whatever reason sometimes they do not respond to
a protocol switch command; this spams the receiver with configuration
commands, and hopefully it listens.

motosend is like ashctl, but for receivers that use the motorola
protocol (like motorola oncore or rockwell jupiter). it's a little
buggy with syncing up to the start of a packet, but it'll send control
strings OK.

lla2ecef transforms latitude/longitude/altitude (aka north-east-up or local
tangential plane) coordinates into the earth-centered-earth-fixed frame. If
invoked as "ecef2lla" it will transform coordinates in the opposite manner.

webgps.py draws a sky view of the satellites and their tracks using HTML5. It
needs to run continuously in order to build a history and generate the
satellite tracks. Your browser must be able to display the <canvas> element to
display the satellite view properly. webgps.py can be called with the argument
"c" to run continously, with an integer duration and a unit suffix to run this
long (units allowed are "s", "m", "h" and "d", e.g. "4h"), or without argument
to create a snapshot of the current sat view.

ntpoffset generate an estimate of your GPS's offset from a peerstats
file.  For instructions on how to use this script, see the GPSD Time
Service HOWTO in this distribution.

ppscheck watches a specified serial device for changes in handshake lines
CD, RI, and CTS by running ioctl(...., TIOCMIWAIT, ...) in a loop.  When it
sees a state change it emits a timestamped line of output dumping the state
of the handshake signals. It's useful for checking whether a device is
emitting 1PPS.  There is troubleshooting advice in the header comment.
  
